In industrial and domestic applications attendance registering is important at each and every
moment. Many face a lot of problems due to lack of proper attendance monitoring system. In this
project we use Fingerprint Sensor (R307) which senses the Fingerprint of a particular person; a
buzzer and Led gets activated whenever a person places his finger on the sensor. Then the
fingerprint is stored in cloud with id no. Many people can store their fingerprints. Then next time
any person puts their finger on the sensor it checks there are any matching fingerprints or not. If
his fingerprint matches with any of the stored fingerprints then the LCD display shows which
person it is and the time & date of checking.
In this model, all the fingerprints are stored each and every time someone places his finger. User
can connect the system wirelessly with the cloud and monitor the process. When the app is
running on the computer, data sent by R307 fingerprint module is received and stored on the
cloud and displayed in serial monitor and 16*2 LCD display module.
This study has mainly focused to develop IOT based biometric attendance system, that is able to
keep record of attendance and count the data for daily purpose. In this project we are going to
design Fingerprint Sensor Based Biometric Attendance System using Arduino. Simply we will
be interfacing fingerprint sensor with Arduino, LCD Display & RTC Module to design the
desired project. In this project, we are using fingerprint Module and Arduino to take and keep
attendance data and records.
Attendance systems are commonly used systems to mark the presence in offices and schools.
From manually marking the attendance in attendance registers to using high-tech
applications and biometric systems, these systems have improved significantly. This project has
a wide application in school, college, business organization, offices where marking of attendance
is required accurately with time.
By using the fingerprint sensor, the system will become more secure for the users.
Biometric student attendance system increases the efficiency of the process of taking student
2
attendance. This presents a simple and portable approach to student attendance in the form of an
Internet of Things (IOT) based system that records the attendance using fingerprint based
biometric scanner and stores them securely over cloud. This system aims to automate the
cumbersome process of manually taking and storing student attendance records. It will also
prevent proxy attendance, thus increasing the reliability of attendance records. The records are
securely stored and can be reliably retrieved whenever required by the teacher.
Proper attendance recording and management has become important in today’s world as
attendance and achievement go hand in hand. Attendance is one of the work ethics valued by
employers. Most of the educational institutions and government organizations in developing
countries still use paper based attendance method for maintaining the attendance records. There
is a need to replace these traditional methods of attendance recording with biometric attendance
system. The unique nature of fingerprint makes it ideal for use in attendance management
systems. Besides being secure, Fingerprint based attendance system will also be environment
friendly. Fingerprint matching is widely used in forensics for a long time. It can also be used in
applications such as identity management and access control. This review incorporates the
problems of attendance systems presently in use, working of a typical fingerprint based
attendance system, study of different systems, their advantages, disadvantages and comparison
based upon important parameters.
